---
pagetitle: >-
    The mathematics of tiers
---

# The mathematics of tiers

:::prereqs
- functions (domains and co-domains)
- tuples (pairs)
:::

Tiers are a nice linguistic metaphor, but what is going on here at a formal level?
How do we specify tiers, and how significant a modification are tiers?
Also, what exactly is the cognitive intuition behind tiers?
These are great questions with some great answers.

## Tier projection as a mapping

Mathematically, tiers are easily defined as the output of a **tier projection** function $\tau$ (this is the Greek letter *tau*).
Each type of tier comes with its own projection function $\tau_T$, which takes a string *s* as its only argument.
Here $T$ is the **tier alphabet**, i.e. the set of symbols that should be projected onto said tier.
The tier projection function $\tau_T$ then deletes every symbol from string *s* that isn't a member of $T$.

::: definition
Given alphabets $\Sigma$ and $T$, the **tier projection** function $\tau_T: \Sigma^* \rightarrow T^*$ maps each $\Sigma$-string $s$ to the longest subsequence $u$ of $s$ such that $u$ is a $T$-string.
:::

::: example
Consider once more the case of Samala sibilant harmony.
Since the set of sibilants contains only *s* and *ʃ*, the tier alphabet $T$ for the sibilant tier contains those two symbols and nothing else.
And $\tau_T(\String{hasxintilawas}) = \String{ss}$.
:::

::: example
As an abstract example, consider the set of all strings over $a$, $b$, and $c$.
Then the $a$-tier of $\String{abbca}$ would be $\tau_{\setof{a}}(\String{abbca}) = \String{aa}$, whereas the tier of $a$s and $b$s would be $\tau_{\setof{a,b}}(\String{abbca}) = \String{abba}$.
:::

::: exercise
Look at the list below, which shows $\Sigma$-strings being mapped to $T$-strings by some tier projection function.
Write down the smallest possible tier alphabet $T$ that gives rise to all these mappings.

1. $\String{aaca} \mapsto \String{aaa}$
1. $\String{cabab} \mapsto \String{abab}$
1. $\String{bbdbe} \mapsto \String{bbdbe}$

:::

::: exercise
Compute each one of the following:

1. $\tau_{\setof{a}}(\String{abca})$
1. $\tau_{\setof{a,b}}(\String{abca})$
1. $\tau_{\setof{a,b,c}}(\String{abca})$
1. $\tau_{\setof{a,b}}(\String{ccc})$
1. $\tau_{\setof{a,b,c}}(\emptystring)$
1. $\tau_\emptyset(\String{abc})$
:::

::: exercise
Explain why, per the definition above, the domain of $\tau_T$ is $\Sigma^*$ while its co-domain is $T^*$.
:::


## Adding tiers to $n$-gram grammars

Now that we have a formal way to specify tiers, it is very easy to graft tiers onto $n$-gram grammars by tying $n$-grams to specific tiers.
The idea is that each $n$-gram now says explicitly which tier it applies to.

::: definition
A **(strict) negative tier $n$-gram grammar** over alphabet $\Sigma$ is a finite set of pairs $\tuple{g_i, T_i}$ such that

- each $T_i$ is a finite set of symbols drawn from $\Sigma$, and
- $g_i \in T_i^n$.

We call $T$ a **tier of $G$** iff $\tuple{g, T} \in G$ for some $g$, and the set of all such $g$ is the **$T$-subgrammar $G_T$** of $G$.
A $\Sigma$-string $s$ is well-formed with respect to $G_T$ iff no $n$-gram that is a factor of $\tau_T(s)$ is a member of $G_T$.
It is well-formed with respect to $G$ iff it is well-formed with respect to $G_T$ for every tier $T$ of $G$.
The **stringset/language generated by $G$** is the set $L(G)$ that contains all strings, and only those, that are well-formed with respect to $G$.
:::

(The definition above uses the term **factor** that was first introduced in the formal definition of negative $n$-gram grammars.
We call an $n$-gram a factor of string $s$ iff it is an $n$-gram of ${{{L}}}^{n-1} s {{{R}}}^{n-1}$.)

::: example
Recall that we captured Korean vowel harmony by projecting all bright vowels (B) and all mid dark vowels (M) onto a dedicated tier and banning BM and MB on this tier. 
More formally: let $G$ be the set
$\setof{
\tuple{\mathrm{BM}, \setof{\mathrm{B}, \mathrm{M}}},
\tuple{\mathrm{MB}, \setof{\mathrm{B}, \mathrm{M}}}
}$.
Then $L(G)$ is the set of strings that obey Korean vowel harmony.

Let us see how this works according to the definition above.
Consider the string *CCBCBCM*, where *C* is a catch-all for consonants, as usual.
This string is well-formed with respect to $G$ iff it is well-formed with respect to every subgrammar of $G$.
But $G$ contains only one subgrammar, which is $G_{\setof{\mathrm{B}, \mathrm{M}}} \is \setof{\mathrm{BM}, \mathrm{MB}}$.
By definition, *CCBCBCM* is well-formed with respect to $G_{\setof{\mathrm{B}, \mathrm{M}}}$ iff $\tau_{\setof{\mathrm{B}, \mathrm{M}}}$ has no factor that is an element of $G_{\setof{\mathrm{B}, \mathrm{M}}}$.
But $\tau_{\setof{\mathrm{B}, \mathrm{M}}}(\String{CCBCBCM}) = \String{BBM}$ contains the factor *BM*, which is in fact a member of $G_{\setof{\mathrm{B}, \mathrm{M}}}$.
Hence *CCBCBCM* is not well-formed with respect to the subgrammar $G_{\setof{\mathrm{B}, \mathrm{M}}}$ and hence isn't well-formed with respect to the tier bigram grammar $G$ either.
:::

::: exercise
The example above uses abstract symbols like B and M instead of the actual vowels.
Suppose that the only bright vowels of Korean are *a* and *u*, and the only mid dark vowel is *o* (just to be clear, this is not at all how Korean works).
Adapt $G$ above to use these vowels instead of B and M.
:::

::: exercise
The term **culminativity** refers to the property that every word has exactly one primary stress.
Suppose that our alphabet is $\{ V, \acute{V} \}$, where $V$ denotes the vowel of an unstressed syllable and $\acute{V}$ the vowel of a syllable with primary stress (we assume for simplicity that every syllable has exactly one vowel).
Propose a negative tier bigram grammar $G$ such that $L(G)$ is the set of all strings over $V$ and $\acute{V}$ that obey culminativity.

*Hint*: {{{L}}} and {{{R}}} can be used with tiers, too.
:::

::: exercise
This continues the previous exercises.
Suppose that $a$ and $u$ are bright vowels in unstressed syllables and $o$ is a mid dark vowel in an unstressed syllable, whereas $\acute{a}$, $\acute{u}$, and $\acute{o}$ are their counterparts in stressed syllables.
Propose a tier bigram grammar $G$ such that $L(G)$ is the set of all strings that obey both Korean vowel harmony and culminativity.

*Hint*: You will need two subgrammars for this.
:::

::: exercise
Only one word in the definition of negative tier $n$-gram grammars has to be changed in order to have a definition of positive tier $n$-gram grammars instead.
What is the relevant change?
:::

## A big change without big changes

Even though tiers make $n$-gram grammars a lot more flexible and greatly broaden their empirical coverage, they are a fairly innocuous change from a mathematical perspective.
First, observe that the $n$-gram grammars we had been looking at before the introduction of tiers can be regarded as just a special case of tier $n$-gram grammars where all $n$-grams use the tier projection $\tau_\Sigma$.

::: example
Remember our negative bigram grammar $G$ for CV syllable templates?
The grammar uses the alphabet $\Sigma \is \setof{ \mathrm{C}, \mathrm{V} }$ and consists of four forbidden bigrams:

1. ${{{L}}}\mathrm{V}$
1. $\mathrm{CC}$
1. $\mathrm{VV}$
1. $\mathrm{C}{{{R}}}$

But we can also regard this as a tier bigram grammar $G'$ that contains the following pairs:

1. $\tuple{ {{{L}}}\mathrm{V}, \Sigma}$
1. $\tuple{ \mathrm{CC}, \Sigma}$
1. $\tuple{ \mathrm{VV}, \Sigma}$
1. $\tuple{ \mathrm{C}{{{R}}}, \Sigma}$

Or in other words, $G$ is simply the $\Sigma$-subgrammar of $G'$, which happens to have no other subgrammars.

Crucially, $G$ and $G'$ generate exactly the same string language.
That's because no matter what string $s$ over $\Sigma$ one picks, it always holds that $\tau_\Sigma(s) = s$.
That the n-grams of $G'$ apply to a tier of $s$ instead of $s$ itself is irrelevant because said tier looks exactly the same as $s$.
:::

The fact that every $n$-gram grammar is a particularly simple tier $n$-gram grammar not only tells us that we are dealing with a very natural generalization, it also makes it easy to generalize our findings about $n$-gram grammars to tier $n$-gram grammars.
This barely requires any work at all.
We just have to take the procedures we already know and carry them out for all the subgrammars of a given tier $n$-gram grammar.
For example, converting a mixed tier $n$-gram grammar to a strict one is simply a matter of converting all subgrammars.

::: example
Below is a tier $n$-gram grammar over alphabet $\setof{a,b,c}$.

- $\tuple{ bb, \setof{a,b}}$
- $\tuple{ bab, \setof{a,b}}$
- $\tuple{ {{{L}}}a, \setof{a,b,c}}$

This grammar enforces two constraints: no string may start with *a*, and if *b* ever occurs somewhere to the right of another *b*, then there must be at least two *a*s between those *b*s.

The $n$-grams vary in length, but we can fix that in the familiar fashion.
First, observe that there are two distinct subgrammars here:

- $G_{\setof{a,b}}$ contains both the bigram $bb$ and the trigram $bab$, making it a mixed grammar.
  We will have to convert this into a strict trigram grammar.
- $G_{\setof{a,b,c}}$ contains only the bigram ${{{L}}}a$.
  This means it is already a strict grammar, but it is a string bigram grammar.
  We will have to convert this to a trigram grammar, too.

The conversion of $G_{\setof{a,b}}$ to a strict trigram grammar proceeds in the usual fashion.

The only minor complication is that the set of trigrams we have to construct depends on the tier alphabet.
For $G_{\setof{a,b}}$, we construct the set of all trigrams over edge markers, $a$, and $b$.
We do not include $c$ here because that isn't part of the tier alphabet.
We then keep all the trigrams that contain an $n$-gram of $G_{\setof{a,b}}$:

- $\tuple{ {{{L}}}bb, \setof{a,b}}$
- $\tuple{ abb, \setof{a,b}}$
- $\tuple{ bba, \setof{a,b}}$
- $\tuple{ bbb, \setof{a,b}}$
- $\tuple{ bb{{{R}}}, \setof{a,b}}$
- $\tuple{ bab, \setof{a,b}}$

When converting $G_{\setof{a,b,c}}$ to trigrams, we do have to consider $c$, too, because it is part of that tier's alphabet.
So now we construct the set of all trigrams over edge markers, $a$, $b$, and $c$, and again we keep all trigrams that contain an $n$-gram of $G_{\setof{a,b,c}}$:

- $\tuple{ {{{L}}}{{{L}}}a, \setof{a,b,c} }$
- $\tuple{ {{{L}}}aa, \setof{a,b,c} }$
- $\tuple{ {{{L}}}ab, \setof{a,b,c} }$
- $\tuple{ {{{L}}}ac, \setof{a,b,c} }$
- $\tuple{ {{{L}}}a{{{R}}}, \setof{a,b,c} }$

The set that contains these 11 trigrams is a tier trigram grammar $G'$ that generates exactly the same string language.
:::

::: exercise
For each one of the strings below, show whether it is generated by $G$ and/or $G'$ from the example above.
Do so by specifying the relevant tiers of each string (you may draw them or write them out) and indicating which factors, if any, are forbidden.

- abc
- cabc
- bcccbcacb
- baccacabcccaab

:::

Now consider the case of polarity conversion, i.e. that every positive $n$-gram grammar has an equivalent negative $n$-gram grammar and the other way round.
This also holds for tier $n$-gram grammars.

::: example
Let $G$ be the tier bigram grammar over alphabet $\setof{a,b}$ that contains the following pairs, and only those:

- $\tuple{ {{{L}}}{{{R}}}, \setof{a} }$
- $\tuple{ bb, \setof{b} }$

Here $N(G)$ (i.e. the string language under the negative interpretation of $G$) consists of all strings that contain at least one $a$ and at most one $b$.

We can construct another tier bigram grammar $G'$ such that $N(G) = P(G')$.
This grammar looks as follows:

- $\tuple{ {{{L}}}a, \setof{a} }$
- $\tuple{ a{{{R}}}, \setof{a} }$
- $\tuple{ {{{L}}}{{{R}}}, \setof{b} }$
- $\tuple{ {{{L}}} b, \setof{b} }$
- $\tuple{ b {{{R}}}, \setof{b} }$

Does this look familiar to you?
For each tier $T$ of $G$, $G'$ contains every pair $\tuple{g, T}$ such that $g$ is a bigram but $\tuple{g, T}$ isn't a member of $G$.
Just like in the original conversion procedure for $n$-gram grammars, $G'$ contains every bigram that isn't a bigram of $G$.
All we have done is take the original procedure and carry it out for each tier of $G$.
:::

If you've paid attention throughout this chapter, you'll probably interject now that we can't just look at a few examples and conclude that things work.
No, we need to give a proof!
You are quite right, except that we don't need any new proofs for the two constructions above.
Instead, we can just reuse the proofs for $n$-gram grammars, thanks to the nifty **lemma** below.
A **lemma** is a theorem that isn't very interesting on its own but saves us some work nonetheless --- in the case at hand, it saves us from having to come up with new proofs.

::: lemma
Let $G$ and $G'$ be tier $n$-gram grammars that are both positive or both negative, and that each have exactly $j \geq 0$ subgrammars $G_1, \ldots, G_j$ and $G'_1, \ldots, G'_j$, respectively.
Then $L(G) = L(G')$ if $L(G_i) = L(G'_i)$ for all $1 \leq i \leq j$.
:::

::: proof
By definition, a string is well-formed with respect to a tier $n$-gram grammar iff it is well-formed with respect to all its subgrammars.

Yes, that's it, we're done here.
Please move on.
:::

::: exercise
Note that the lemma uses *if* instead of *iff*.
This allows for cases where $L(G_i) \neq L(G'_i)$ yet $L(G) = L(G')$ nonetheless.
Given an example of such a case.
:::

The lemma guarantees that any kind of operation on $n$-gram grammars that does not affect their string language can be applied to subgrammars without changing the string language of the tier $n$-gram grammar.
If you want to modify a tier $n$-gram grammar in some manner without changing the string language it generates, you'll want to figure out a way to modify its subgrammars without changing their string languages.
And this is exactly what we did for converting from mixed grammars to strict grammars, and for the polarity conversion.
Similar insights can be used to show that just as with negative $n$-gram grammars, $L(G) \cap L(G') = L(G \cup G')$ for negative tier $n$-ngram grammars (that is to say, we can still combine grammars via union).
All the things we have done with $n$-gram grammars, we can do with tier $n$-gram grammars!

If you think about it, this is quite remarkable.
The addition of tier feels like a major modification, and it does greatly boost the range of phenomena we can capture with $n$-grams.
But mathematically, barely anything has changed.
The definitions are very similar, we can still use the familiar techniques we used with $n$-gram grammars, and we didn't even need any new proofs.
Without math, the introduction of tiers might have put us back to square one in terms of our understanding of the formalism.
But since we took the time to probe the mathematical depths of $n$-gram grammars, adding tiers turned out to be effortless.
I've said it before and I'll say it again: math is for lazy people!

## Recap

- The **tier projection** for tier $T$ is a function $\tau_T$ that maps every string to its longest subsequence that only contains symbols of $T$.
- A negative **tier $n$-gram grammar** uses $n$-grams that have been annotated to indicate which tier they apply to.
  Formally, it is a finite set of pairs $\tuple{g, T}$ where $g$ is an $n$-gram and $T$ the tier's alphabet.
- Given a tier $n$-gram grammar $G$, we sometimes use $G_T$ for the set of $G$'s $n$-grams that apply on tier $T$.
  We also call this a **subgrammar** of $G$.
- Each subgrammar is effectively a negative $n$-gram grammar that applies to a tier instead of the whole string.
  This makes it easy to generalize our previous findings (strict VS mixed, negative VS positive, ways of combining grammars) from $n$-gram grammars to tier $n$-gram grammars.
- A **lemma** is a theorem that may not be all that interesting in its own right but is very useful in establishing other theorems.
