source/background/03_sets/01_operations.md, before:

---
pagetitle: Union, intersection, and complement of sets
---

# Union, intersection, and complement of sets

:::prereqs
- sets (basic notation)
:::

Sets can be combined with each other in various ways.
Sometimes this is used as a different way of defining sets, and sometimes it is an actual construction process where multiple sets serve as the input to some mechanism that returns a single set as the output.
You'll see many examples of both usages throughout the course.
Before we discuss these operations, though, we have to introduce one special set that will help us illustrate how these operations work.


## The empty set

As mentioned before, you can think of sets as a kind of strange container without internal order and without duplicates.
Since containers can be empty, it isn't too surprising that there is something called the **empty set**.
The empty set is written $\setof{}$, or more commonly $\emptyset$.

The empty set contains nothing.
There is no $a$ such that $a \in \emptyset$.
At the same time, the empty set is not simply nothing because it is still a set.
A set is not nothing, just like an empty container is not nothing.

The empty set may seem rather useless to you, but it actually has a very important role to play.
Just like the introduction of $0$ was a tremendous breakthrough that made arithmetic a lot more elegant and internally consistent, operations on sets would not nearly be as well-behaved without the empty set.
You will see some examples of that right away.

::: exercise
For each one of the statements below, say whether it is true or false.

- $\emptyset = \setof{}$
- $\emptyset = \setof{\emptyset}$
- $\emptyset \in \setof{a}$
- $\setof{a,b} \neq \emptyset$

:::


## Union

Given two sets $A$ and $B$, their **union** $A \cup B$ is the set that contains

- all elements of $A$, and
- all elements of $B$, and
- nothing else.

This means that the union of two sets is the result of taking everything that belongs to at least one set.
So union builds bigger sets from smaller sets.
This makes it something like the set counterpart of addition over numbers.

::: example
The union of $\setof{1}$ and $\setof{2,3,4}$ is $\setof{1,2,3,4}$.
The union of $\setof{1,2}$ and $\setof{3,4}$ is also $\setof{1,2,3,4}$.
:::

::: exercise
Compute the union of the following:

- $\setof{0,1} \cup \setof{2,3}$
- $\setof{0,1} \cup \setof{1,2,3}$
- $\setof{0,1} \cup \setof{0,1}$
- $\setof{0,1} \cup \emptyset$
- $\setof{1,2,3} \cup \setof{0,1}$

:::

::: exercise
Compute the union of the following:

- $\setof{0,\setof{1}} \cup \setof{2,3}$
- $\setof{0,\setof{1}} \cup \setof{1,2,3}$
- $\setof{0,\setof{1}} \cup \setof{0,1}$
- $\setof{0,\setof{1}} \cup \emptyset$
- $\setof{1,2,3} \cup \setof{0,\setof{1}}$

:::

Union is **associative**, which means that $(A \cup B) \cup C = A \cup (B \cup C)$.
This is just like $(5 + 4) + 3 = 5 + (4 + 3)$.
It is also **commutative**.
That is to say, the order of arguments does not matter: $A \cup B = B \cup A$.
This again mirrors addition, where $5 + 3 = 3 + 5$.
Also note that $A \cup \emptyset = A$ for any set $A$, just like $n + 0 = n$ for any number $n$.

::: exercise
Compute the union of the following in a step-wise fashion:

- $\setof{0,1} \cup \setof{2,3} \cup \emptyset$
- $\setof{0,1} \cup \emptyset \cup \setof{2,3}$

:::

## Intersection

Intersection is the opposite of union in that it builds smaller sets rather than bigger ones.
Given two sets $A$ and $B$, their **intersection** $A \cap B$ is the set that contains only those elements that belong to $A$ as well as $B$.

::: example
The intersection of $\setof{1}$ and $\setof{2,3,4}$ is $\emptyset$, and so is the intersection of $\setof{1,2}$ and $\setof{3,4}$.
But the intersection of $\setof{1,2}$ and $\setof{2,3,4}$ is $\setof{2}$.
:::

::: exercise
Compute the intersection of the following:

- $\setof{0,1} \cap \setof{2,3}$
- $\setof{0,1} \cap \setof{1,2,3}$
- $\setof{0,1} \cap \setof{0,1}$
- $\setof{0,1} \cap \emptyset$
- $\setof{1,2,3} \cap \setof{0,1}$

:::

::: exercise
Compute the intersection of the following:

- $\setof{0,\setof{1}} \cap \setof{2,3}$
- $\setof{0,\setof{1}} \cap \setof{1,2,3}$
- $\setof{0,\setof{1}} \cap \setof{0,1}$
- $\setof{0,\setof{1}} \cap \emptyset$
- $\setof{1,2,3} \cap \setof{0,\setof{1}}$

:::

Note that $A \cap \emptyset = \emptyset$ no matter what the set $A$ looks like.
This is similar to how $n \cdot 0 = 0$ irrespective of the value of $n$.
So intersection is akin to multiplication for sets.
Like multiplication, intersection is associative, so that $(A \cap B) \cap C = A \cap (B \cap C)$.
This mirrors the fact that $(5 \cdot 4) \cdot 2 = 5 \cdot (4 \cdot 2)$.
Intersection is also commutative, again just like multiplication:
$A \cap B = B \cap A$, and $m \cdot n = n \cdot m$.

The one difference between intersection and multiplication seems to be that the former produces something smaller and the latter something bigger.
But as we will learn later, this isn't really all that important, and the two operations are indeed very close counterparts in an abstract sense.

## Relative complement

Given the set-counterparts for $+$ and $\cdot$, you probably expect one for subtraction, too.
It exists, indeed, and is called **relative complement**.
Given two sets $A$ and $B$, their relative complement is written $A - B$ (sometimes $A \setminus B$).
The *complement of $B$ relative to $A$* contains all members of $A$ that are not members of $B$.

::: example
The complement of $\setof{2}$ relative to $\setof{1,2,3}$ is $\setof{1,2,3} - \setof{2} = \setof{1,3}$.
The complement of $\setof{3,4,5}$ relative to $\setof{2,3}$ is $\setof{2,3} - \setof{3,4,5} = \setof{2}$.
:::

Relative complement is **not** associative in the general case.
For example, $(\setof{0,1} - \setof{0}) - \setof{1} = \emptyset$, whereas $\setof{0,1} - (\setof{0} - \setof{1}) = \setof{1}$.
Since associativity requires that the order of evaluation may never matter, this one example where it does matter is sufficient to show that associativity does not hold.
That doesn't mean that there are never cases where one can't change the order of evaluation at all.
For instance, $(\setof{0,1} - \setof{0}) - \setof{2} = \setof{1} = \setof{0,1} - (\setof{0} - \setof{2})$.
But that is merely a coincidence.
That relative complement is not associative mirrors subtraction for numbers, where $(5 - 2) - 3 = 0 \neq 6 = 5 - (2 -3)$.
Commutativity does not hold for relative complement either, as is shown by $\setof{5} - \setof{5,4} = \emptyset \neq \setof{4} = \setof{5,4} - \setof{5}$.

::: exercise
Give a concrete example where $A - B = B - A$.
Then make a single change to $A$ such that $A - B \neq B - A$.
:::

If $A$ is clear from context, we just write $\overline{B}$ for $A - B$ and call it the complement of $B$.

::: example
Given some fixed $A \is \setof{0,1,2,3}$, we have $\overline{\setof{1,3}} = \setof{0,2}$.
:::

::: exercise
Assume that the context fixes $A \is \setof{0,1,2,3}$.
Compute all of the following:

- $\overline{\setof{0}}$
- $\overline{\setof{0,\setof{1}}}$
- $\overline{\setof{}}$
- $\overline{\setof{\setof{0}}}$
- $\setof{\overline{\setof{0}}}$
:::

## Summary

- The **union** of $A$ and $B$ is the smallest set that contains every $x$ such that $x \in A$ or $x \in B$ (or both).
- The **intersection** of $A$ and $B$ is the smallest set that contains every $x$ such that $x \in A$ and $x \in B$.
- The **relative complement** of $A$ and $B$ (or equivalently, *the complement of $B$ relative to $A$*) is the smallest set that contains every $x$ such that $x \in A$ and $x \notin B$.
- Union and intersection are associative (order of evaluation doesn't matter) and commutative (order of arguments doesn't matter).
- Relative complement is neither associative nor commutative.
- The complement of $B$, denoted $\overline{B}$, is a shorthand for $A - B$ when $A$ is clear from context.

Commit message:

add exercise on double complements

source/background/03_sets/01_operations.md, after:

---
pagetitle: Union, intersection, and complement of sets
---

# Union, intersection, and complement of sets

:::prereqs
- sets (basic notation)
:::

Sets can be combined with each other in various ways.
Sometimes this is used as a different way of defining sets, and sometimes it is an actual construction process where multiple sets serve as the input to some mechanism that returns a single set as the output.
You'll see many examples of both usages throughout the course.
Before we discuss these operations, though, we have to introduce one special set that will help us illustrate how these operations work.


## The empty set

As mentioned before, you can think of sets as a kind of strange container without internal order and without duplicates.
Since containers can be empty, it isn't too surprising that there is something called the **empty set**.
The empty set is written $\setof{}$, or more commonly $\emptyset$.

The empty set contains nothing.
There is no $a$ such that $a \in \emptyset$.
At the same time, the empty set is not simply nothing because it is still a set.
A set is not nothing, just like an empty container is not nothing.

The empty set may seem rather useless to you, but it actually has a very important role to play.
Just like the introduction of $0$ was a tremendous breakthrough that made arithmetic a lot more elegant and internally consistent, operations on sets would not nearly be as well-behaved without the empty set.
You will see some examples of that right away.

::: exercise
For each one of the statements below, say whether it is true or false.

- $\emptyset = \setof{}$
- $\emptyset = \setof{\emptyset}$
- $\emptyset \in \setof{a}$
- $\setof{a,b} \neq \emptyset$

:::


## Union

Given two sets $A$ and $B$, their **union** $A \cup B$ is the set that contains

- all elements of $A$, and
- all elements of $B$, and
- nothing else.

This means that the union of two sets is the result of taking everything that belongs to at least one set.
So union builds bigger sets from smaller sets.
This makes it something like the set counterpart of addition over numbers.

::: example
The union of $\setof{1}$ and $\setof{2,3,4}$ is $\setof{1,2,3,4}$.
The union of $\setof{1,2}$ and $\setof{3,4}$ is also $\setof{1,2,3,4}$.
:::

::: exercise
Compute the union of the following:

- $\setof{0,1} \cup \setof{2,3}$
- $\setof{0,1} \cup \setof{1,2,3}$
- $\setof{0,1} \cup \setof{0,1}$
- $\setof{0,1} \cup \emptyset$
- $\setof{1,2,3} \cup \setof{0,1}$

:::

::: exercise
Compute the union of the following:

- $\setof{0,\setof{1}} \cup \setof{2,3}$
- $\setof{0,\setof{1}} \cup \setof{1,2,3}$
- $\setof{0,\setof{1}} \cup \setof{0,1}$
- $\setof{0,\setof{1}} \cup \emptyset$
- $\setof{1,2,3} \cup \setof{0,\setof{1}}$

:::

Union is **associative**, which means that $(A \cup B) \cup C = A \cup (B \cup C)$.
This is just like $(5 + 4) + 3 = 5 + (4 + 3)$.
It is also **commutative**.
That is to say, the order of arguments does not matter: $A \cup B = B \cup A$.
This again mirrors addition, where $5 + 3 = 3 + 5$.
Also note that $A \cup \emptyset = A$ for any set $A$, just like $n + 0 = n$ for any number $n$.

::: exercise
Compute the union of the following in a step-wise fashion:

- $\setof{0,1} \cup \setof{2,3} \cup \emptyset$
- $\setof{0,1} \cup \emptyset \cup \setof{2,3}$

:::

## Intersection

Intersection is the opposite of union in that it builds smaller sets rather than bigger ones.
Given two sets $A$ and $B$, their **intersection** $A \cap B$ is the set that contains only those elements that belong to $A$ as well as $B$.

::: example
The intersection of $\setof{1}$ and $\setof{2,3,4}$ is $\emptyset$, and so is the intersection of $\setof{1,2}$ and $\setof{3,4}$.
But the intersection of $\setof{1,2}$ and $\setof{2,3,4}$ is $\setof{2}$.
:::

::: exercise
Compute the intersection of the following:

- $\setof{0,1} \cap \setof{2,3}$
- $\setof{0,1} \cap \setof{1,2,3}$
- $\setof{0,1} \cap \setof{0,1}$
- $\setof{0,1} \cap \emptyset$
- $\setof{1,2,3} \cap \setof{0,1}$

:::

::: exercise
Compute the intersection of the following:

- $\setof{0,\setof{1}} \cap \setof{2,3}$
- $\setof{0,\setof{1}} \cap \setof{1,2,3}$
- $\setof{0,\setof{1}} \cap \setof{0,1}$
- $\setof{0,\setof{1}} \cap \emptyset$
- $\setof{1,2,3} \cap \setof{0,\setof{1}}$

:::

Note that $A \cap \emptyset = \emptyset$ no matter what the set $A$ looks like.
This is similar to how $n \cdot 0 = 0$ irrespective of the value of $n$.
So intersection is akin to multiplication for sets.
Like multiplication, intersection is associative, so that $(A \cap B) \cap C = A \cap (B \cap C)$.
This mirrors the fact that $(5 \cdot 4) \cdot 2 = 5 \cdot (4 \cdot 2)$.
Intersection is also commutative, again just like multiplication:
$A \cap B = B \cap A$, and $m \cdot n = n \cdot m$.

The one difference between intersection and multiplication seems to be that the former produces something smaller and the latter something bigger.
But as we will learn later, this isn't really all that important, and the two operations are indeed very close counterparts in an abstract sense.

## Relative complement

Given the set-counterparts for $+$ and $\cdot$, you probably expect one for subtraction, too.
It exists, indeed, and is called **relative complement**.
Given two sets $A$ and $B$, their relative complement is written $A - B$ (sometimes $A \setminus B$).
The *complement of $B$ relative to $A$* contains all members of $A$ that are not members of $B$.

::: example
The complement of $\setof{2}$ relative to $\setof{1,2,3}$ is $\setof{1,2,3} - \setof{2} = \setof{1,3}$.
The complement of $\setof{3,4,5}$ relative to $\setof{2,3}$ is $\setof{2,3} - \setof{3,4,5} = \setof{2}$.
:::

Relative complement is **not** associative in the general case.
For example, $(\setof{0,1} - \setof{0}) - \setof{1} = \emptyset$, whereas $\setof{0,1} - (\setof{0} - \setof{1}) = \setof{1}$.
Since associativity requires that the order of evaluation may never matter, this one example where it does matter is sufficient to show that associativity does not hold.
That doesn't mean that there are never cases where one can't change the order of evaluation at all.
For instance, $(\setof{0,1} - \setof{0}) - \setof{2} = \setof{1} = \setof{0,1} - (\setof{0} - \setof{2})$.
But that is merely a coincidence.
That relative complement is not associative mirrors subtraction for numbers, where $(5 - 2) - 3 = 0 \neq 6 = 5 - (2 -3)$.
Commutativity does not hold for relative complement either, as is shown by $\setof{5} - \setof{5,4} = \emptyset \neq \setof{4} = \setof{5,4} - \setof{5}$.

::: exercise
Give a concrete example where $A - B = B - A$.
Then make a single change to $A$ such that $A - B \neq B - A$.
:::

If $A$ is clear from context, we just write $\overline{B}$ for $A - B$ and call it the complement of $B$.

::: example
Given some fixed $A \is \setof{0,1,2,3}$, we have $\overline{\setof{1,3}} = \setof{0,2}$.
:::

::: exercise
Assume that the context fixes $A \is \setof{0,1,2,3}$.
Compute all of the following:

- $\overline{\setof{0}}$
- $\overline{\setof{0,\setof{1}}}$
- $\overline{\setof{}}$
- $\overline{\setof{\setof{0}}}$
- $\setof{\overline{\setof{0}}}$
:::

::: exercise
No matter how one chooses $A$ and $B$, it always holds that the complement of the complement of $B$ is identical to $B$ itself.
In symbols: $B = \overline{\overline{B}}$.
Explain why this holds.

*Hint*: By definition, $\overline{\overline{B}} = A - \overline{B} = A - (A - B)$.
:::

## Summary

- The **union** of $A$ and $B$ is the smallest set that contains every $x$ such that $x \in A$ or $x \in B$ (or both).
- The **intersection** of $A$ and $B$ is the smallest set that contains every $x$ such that $x \in A$ and $x \in B$.
- The **relative complement** of $A$ and $B$ (or equivalently, *the complement of $B$ relative to $A$*) is the smallest set that contains every $x$ such that $x \in A$ and $x \notin B$.
- Union and intersection are associative (order of evaluation doesn't matter) and commutative (order of arguments doesn't matter).
- Relative complement is neither associative nor commutative.
- The complement of $B$, denoted $\overline{B}$, is a shorthand for $A - B$ when $A$ is clear from context.
